README.md, before:

# Portfolio Project

This is a portfolio website that I am building as a full-stack application from scratch. The project will be split into four phases which I will describe below.


### Phase 1 - Portfolio (IN PROGRESS)

The main goal of this phase is to learn and integrate some new frontend technologies that I have never used before without having to worry about a complicated backend setup (for now). I will be hosting a website on Netlify once this phase is complete and this README will be updated when that's done.

The website will contain three main pages:
- A **Homepage** where you can find basic information about me and my goals
- A **Projects** page where you can view details on my past projects
- A **Competencies** page where you can view all programming languages, frameworks and tools that I have experience in

The website will be built using the following tools:
- Node.js as the development environment to manage dependencies and scripts
- React to build the frontend to make easily reusable JSX components
- Vite as the build tool to transpile the code into a browser-readable format
- Tailwind CSS for pre-made and descriptive CSS classes for easy and efficient styling
- Netlify for simple, cheap frontend deployment


### Phase 2 - Blog Frontend

Once phase 1 is complete and deployed, I will add another page to the frontend of the project. This will be a blog feed where I can post about new things I am learning or doing in my life.

The blog page will have a log in system with proper authentication and authorisation methods for security purposes. Only my user will be authorised to post on the blog feed, but any user can create an account, log in and leave comments.

The frontend of the blog part of the project will be built using the same technologies as the portfolio in Phase 1, along with JSON Web Tokens stored locally for authentication.


### Phase 3 - Blog Backend

The backend of the blog will be an API and database to handle registering and logging in, blog post creation and commenting. The plan for this phase is not exact, but here are the technologies I plan to use for completing this:
- Express.js as the backend API framework with Node.js as the runtime
- PostgreSQL relational database
- Fully integrated JWT authentication


### Phase 4 - Final Deployment

The frontend of the project will be deployed on Netlify as previously mentioned.

The backend of the project will be deployed on Heroku with Heroku's Postgres integration for the relational database.



# My Links

[LinkedIn](https://www.linkedin.com/in/jack-chiplin-b60164334/)

Commit message:

Updated README to contain local build instruction

README.md, after:

# Portfolio Project

This is a portfolio website that I am building as a full-stack application from scratch. The project will be split into four phases which I will describe below.


### Phase 1 - Portfolio (IN PROGRESS)

The main goal of this phase is to learn and integrate some new frontend technologies that I have never used before without having to worry about a complicated backend setup (for now). I will be hosting a website on Netlify once this phase is complete and this README will be updated when that's done.

The website will contain three main pages:
- A **Homepage** where you can find basic information about me and my goals
- A **Projects** page where you can view details on my past projects
- A **Competencies** page where you can view all programming languages, frameworks and tools that I have experience in

The website will be built using the following tools:
- Node.js as the development environment to manage dependencies and scripts
- React to build the frontend to make easily reusable JSX components
- Vite as the build tool to transpile the code into a browser-readable format
- Tailwind CSS for pre-made and descriptive CSS classes for easy and efficient styling
- Netlify for simple, cheap frontend deployment


### Phase 2 - Blog Frontend

Once phase 1 is complete and deployed, I will add another page to the frontend of the project. This will be a blog feed where I can post about new things I am learning or doing in my life.

The blog page will have a log in system with proper authentication and authorisation methods for security purposes. Only my user will be authorised to post on the blog feed, but any user can create an account, log in and leave comments.

The frontend of the blog part of the project will be built using the same technologies as the portfolio in Phase 1, along with JSON Web Tokens stored locally for authentication.


### Phase 3 - Blog Backend

The backend of the blog will be an API and database to handle registering and logging in, blog post creation and commenting. The plan for this phase is not exact, but here are the technologies I plan to use for completing this:
- Express.js as the backend API framework with Node.js as the runtime
- PostgreSQL relational database
- Fully integrated JWT authentication


### Phase 4 - Final Deployment

The frontend of the project will be deployed on Netlify as previously mentioned.

The backend of the project will be deployed on Heroku with Heroku's Postgres integration for the relational database.


# Local Build Instructions
To build this website yourself, open up a terminal and navigate to where you want the project to be located. Begin by cloning the repository and moving into the directory:
```bash
git clone https://github.com/Jamming17.portfolio
cd portfolio
```
Make sure you have [Node.js](https://nodejs.org/en/download) installed on your system (v20 or later recommended). Once installed, run the following command to install all packages for the project.
```bash
npm install
```
Lastly, start the website with Vite using the following command:
```bash
npm run dev
```
This will build the website and run it locally. This can be accessed on http://localhost:5173, but if this doesn't work, press `o + Enter` on the command line to open in a browser.

# My Links

[LinkedIn](https://www.linkedin.com/in/jack-chiplin-b60164334/)
